Proposal for the tier 2 redundancy eliminator (#649)
faster-cpython/ideas: 3.13/redundancy_eliminator.md

# The Tier 2 Redundancy Eliminator

Author: Ken Jin, Mark Shannon

Tier 2 traces require optimization. At minimum, redundant operations
should be removed. This is where the name "Redundancy Eliminator" is
derived from. This forms part of the larger effort towards
the tier 2 optimizer.

## Abstract Interpretation of Uops

> To analyze the uops, [abstract interpretation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_interpretation)
> shall be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To analyze the uops, we use
[abstract interpretation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_interpretation).
```

Just like the CPython interpreter is an interpretation over
Python program state, represented by `PyObject *`, the abstract interpreter
shall be an interpretation over Python symbolic information state,
represented by `_Py_UOpsSymType *`.

> The abstract interepeter has the equivalent constructs of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The abstract interpreter has the equivalent constructs of the
```

CPython interpreter to represent state. It has symbolic

> local and symbolic frames, This allows it to emulate CPython

Reviewer: ```suggestion
local and symbolic frames. This allows it to emulate CPython
```

runtime state accurately.

> Executing "steps" in the abstract interpreter is thus the same as

Reviewer: Avoid awkward repetition "same ... same"
```suggestion
Executing "steps" in the abstract interpreter is thus similar to
```

doing the same in CPython -- by interpreting bytecode instructions.

> The abstract interpreter thus executes a bytecode, update its

Reviewer: Maybe use scare-quotes around "executes"? Or alternatively "symbolically executes" (no scare-quotes).
```suggestion
The abstract interpreter thus "executes" a bytecode, update its
```

symbolic state, and repeats until it reaches a terminator (the end
of the trace).

### Lattice

**Note: if you are uninterested in the theory behind data-flow analysis,\
please skip this section.**

The states of information in such an abstract interpretation can be
represented by a [lattice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lattice_(order))
of values. The lattice itself is an ordered powerset
of all variables and their associated information.

For example, here is a trivial lattice for the statement 
```python
x = 1
y = 2.0
```
:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A("`Bottom, ie. x: *?*, y: *?*`") --> B("`x: *int*, y: *?*`")
    A --> C("`x: *?*, y: *float*`")
    B --> D("`Top, x: *int*, y: *float*`")
    C --> D
  
```

Real Python runtime information
may contain more complex types, constants, and unions of types.

Each `_Py_UOpsSymType` captures all the information associated

> with a variable at any point in the lattice.

Reviewer: It would be nice to go over at least the most basic info contained in this struct (the type and the constant -- you can leave out refinements and the fact that the type may be a union).

For more information regarding lattices in compiler theory,
Page 27 onwards of this presentation provides a gentle introduction
https://ilyasergey.net/CS4212/_static/lectures/PLDI-Week-12-dataflow.pdf
Credits to the courses UPenn Compilers (CIS 341) and NUS Compiler
Design (CS4212).

### Abstract DSL

A extra specification that overrides the original cases in
`Python/bytecodes.c` is used.
This generates an abstract interpreter that operates on these symbolic values.
Where there is no overridden case, the generator falls back to a generic
version where all output stack values are unknown symbolic values.

```
// Python/bytecodes.c
op(OP, (arg1 -- out)) {
    eggs();
}
```
```
// Python/tier2_redundancy_eliminator_bytecodes.c
// Nothing to see here :).
```
```
// Python/abstract_interp_cases.c.h
case OP: {
    _Py_UOpsSymType *out;
    out = sym_init_unknown(ctx);
    if (out == NULL) goto error;

>     stack_pointer[0] = out;
>     stack_pointer += 1;

Reviewer: Given that the definition has an equal number of input and output stack effects, I'd have expected this not to adjust the stack pointer, and overwrite the top:
```suggestion
    stack_pointer[-1] = out;
```

    break;
}
```

Where this is an overridden case, all information from the overridder
takes precedence. For example:

```
// Python/bytecodes.c
op(OP, (arg1 -- out)) {

>     eggs();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    out = eggs(arg1);
```

}
```
```
// Python/tier2_redundancy_eliminator_bytecodes.c
op(OP, (arg1 -- out)) {

>     spam();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    out = spam(arg1);
```

}
```
```
// Python/abstract_interp_cases.c.h
case OP: {
    _Py_UOpsSymType *arg1;
    _Py_UOpsSymType *out;
    arg1 = stack_pointer[-1];

>     spam();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    out = spam(arg1);
```
(Note that the override *must* set `out`, otherwise we'd put an uninitialized pointer on top of the stack.)

    oc(other constants);
    b("bottom(unknown)");
    b-->NULL;
    b-->nnull;
    nnull-->nnone;
    nnull-->None;
    nnone-->ot;
    nnone-->bl;
    ot-->oc;
    oc-->top;
    None-->top;
    NULL-->top;
    bl-->t;
    bl-->f;
    t-->top;
    f-->top;
```

Note: there should be edges going from each type to `top`, but
for brevity and clarity we have omitted them.

Edges in the lattice represent a
[partial order relation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partially_ordered_set).
For example, `bool <: True`, where `<:` is the supertype relation,
because `bool` is the supertype of `True`. The supertype relation is
reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive, and is thus a partial
order relation.

The [least upper bound](https://www.infinitelymore.xyz/p/lattices)
of any pair `{a, b}` in the lattice, ie the *join* of `{a, b}`, represents
the the lowest common subtype of both `a` and `b`. In this case,
the lowest common subtype of any two types,
assuming `a != b`, is `top`. This means we can never reach
`top`, as that is a contradiction -- there is no type
in CPython that represents the subtype of all types. (Think:
how can something be a subtype of `int`, `float`, `str`, `bool`, etc.

> all at the same time!)

Reviewer: I guess that if we find ourselves at _top_, we have projected a trace into unreachable code -- e.g. we traced through something that is guaranteed to raise. Interesting.

The greatest lower bound of any pair `{a, b}` in the lattice, ie the
*meet* of `{a, b}`, represents the lowest common supertype of `{a, b}`,

> where `a != b`.

Reviewer: I guess if `a == b` the _meet_ is just `a`. :-) I'm very visually oriented -- in the diagram the _meet_ is the closest node from which both `a` and `b` can be reached.

Author: Yup that's right!

# The Tier 2 Redundancy Eliminator

Author: Ken Jin, Mark Shannon

Tier 2 traces require optimization. At minimum, redundant operations
should be removed. This is where the name "Redundancy Eliminator" is
derived from. This forms part of the larger effort towards
the tier 2 optimizer.

## Abstract Interpretation of Uops

To analyze the uops, [abstract interpretation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_interpretation)
shall be used.

Just like the CPython interpreter is an interpretation over
Python program state, represented by `PyObject *`, the abstract interpreter
shall be an interpretation over Python symbolic information state,
represented by `_Py_UOpsSymType *`.

### Lattice

The states of information in such an abstract interpretation can be
represented by a [lattice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lattice_(order))
of values. The lattice itself is an ordered powerset

> of all variables and their associated information.

Reviewer: Honestly, this is not a very accessible description. I've heard of lattices since the '80s but never studied them. I believe I fully understand the states of the abstract interpreter, but the term lattice doesn't clarify it to me. I don't know if that makes me unique among the likely audience of this document (people who would like to contribute an optimization or two, and who understand the code and the concept of an abstract interpreter well enough *in practice* to be able to)?

Author: Agreed. This description is just to cement the theoretical aspects of it.

If the audience comes from a non-compilers background. The previous paragraph is enough. They should just skip this portion.

If the audience comes from a compilers background, this is the standard way of describing data-flow analysis. So they would immediately get it there.

I assume there are more people from non-compilers backgrounds. So I will add a note telling them to skip it, and expounding more non-theory parts.

For example, here is a trivial lattice for the statement 
```python
x = 1
y = 2.0
```
:

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    A("`Bottom, ie. x: *?*, y: *?*`") --> B("`x: *int*, y: *?*`")
    A --> C("`x: *?*, y: *float*`")
    B --> D("`Top, x: *int*, y: *float*`")

>     C --> D

Reviewer: If it wasn't apparently the standard way to render lattices (at least, all the diagrams in the Wikipedia article also use it), it would be more understandable if the chart was rendered upside down, so the flow corresponds to the code... Not sure what should prevail, conformance to the theory or to the code.

Author: Lattices in compilers are usually rendered bottom-up, so a little different from the math version in wikipedia.

Author: Oh apparently it's normally top down. Let me reformat.

  
```

> This example is intentionally contrived. Real Python runtime information

Reviewer: There's nothing contrived (artificial, unnatural) about it -- it's about the simplest example for which the Lattice description makes sense.

may contain more complex types, constants, and unions of types.

> Each `_Py_UOpsSymType` thus captures all the information associated

Reviewer: Leave out "thus" -- whatever it captures doesn't follow from the preceding explanation.

with a variable at any point in the lattice.

> ### Abstract DSL Generator

Reviewer: Remember that "DSL" stands for "domain-specific language". We refer to the grammar of bytecodes.c as a DSL because it has a custom grammar (not standard C or Python) for which we wrote a custom parser.

But "DSL generator" sounds like it generates the DSL. Our generator doesn't -- it rather takes a file written in our Domain Specific Language and generates (most of) an abstract interpreter.

> A DSL that overrides the original cases in `Python/bytecodes.c` is used.

Reviewer: AFAIK the extra input file to the generator is not "a DSL" -- it's not "a language", it's a "program" written in our DSL. Although I'd rather not call it "program" either -- maybe call it a "specification"?

This generates an abstract interpreter that operates on these symbolic values.

> Where there is no overidden case, the generator falls back to a generic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where there is no overridden case, the generator falls back to a generic
```

version where all output stack values are unknown symbolic values.
For example:

```
// Python/bytecodes.c
pure op(OP, (arg1 -- out)) {
    spam();
}
```
```

> // Python/tier2_redundancy_eliminator_bytecodes.c

Reviewer: I hope we can shorten the filename a bit. :-)

pure op(OP, (arg1 -- out: &PYFLOAT_TYPE)) {
    spam();
}
```
```
// Python/abstract_interp_cases.c.h
case OP: {
    _Py_UOpsSymType *out;
    out = sym_init_unknown(ctx);
    if (out == NULL) goto error;

    sym_set_type(out, PYLONG_TYPE, 0);
    stack_pointer[0] = out;
    stack_pointer += 1;
    break;

> }

Reviewer: This output seems incorrect -- since we have `spam()` in the override file, I'd expect the generated output to also have `spam()`. Maybe you've accidentally shown the *default* output instead of the output for an overridden op?

Other thoughts to make the example clearer:
- Have two opcodes in the example bytecodes.c, one that is overridden and one that isn't
- Have the override call a different function than the version in bytecodes.c
- Have the example override read and write the stack effects (e.g. `out = spam(arg1)`)
- Possibly also show the difference between pure and non-pure overrides (if there is a difference -- otherwise maybe don't bother showing `pure` in the example)
- Show the default output (i.e., for the non-overridden op) for a non-trivial example (at least one input and one output stack effect)

> by a lattice. Roughly, it looks like this:

Reviewer: What understanding to we gain by saying this is a lattice, rather than a DAG? It doesn't seem to be at all related to the lattice of the variables and stack items (where I actually do understand that "lattice" is the right concept).

Author: Probably have to ask @markshannon for this one.

Author: Oh I remembered why, the edges aren't directional but bi-directional, and there should be edges going from each type to every other type, but that is omitted for the sake of clarity. So it's indeed a lattice.

Reviewer: Okay, then I am even more confused. What do edges represent? If we have a node that is True, what does an edge to False mean? That the initial knowledge was a lie?

Author: Woops I misspoke. This is the correct version:

> there should be edges going from each type to ~every other type~ **the top**

Also I went to refresh my knowledge on lattices, this is a good read https://www.infinitelymore.xyz/p/lattices. The edges represent a partial order relation (like in a Hasse diagram).

Author: The latest commit tries to explain this further. Hopefully it aids your understanding!

Reviewer: Thanks! I think my problem was that I know this structure very well, but I've never thought of it as a lattice -- usually I think of it as a DAG where edges represent a subtype relationship, and sometimes I think of it as a collection of sets where each node represents a strict superset of all of the nodes it links to -- both are just different ways to say "partial ordering" (of sets of values). :-)

It just occurred to me that in this diagram, when a node has multiple outgoing edges, there are two possibly interesting properties of our DAG (but not necessarily of all DAGs):

1. The nodes pointed to by edges going out of a given node all represent disjoint sets
2. The union of all nodes pointed to by a given node's outgoing edges *may* be equal to the source node

I don't think either of those properties is all that useful though. (1) doesn't have to hold, and (2) doesn't hold when the outgoing edge goes to _top_, nor presumably in _other constants_ (but it holds for all other nodes in this particular diagram). It's possible that (1) is useful when we're replacing weaker guards with stronger ones.
